I never dreamed when I signed on to here
how big this problem was going to be.
Watch out for snakes.
They're grumpy.
Don't you fall down.
You're going to want to see this.
You can see it running out of the
surface casing right here.
Bubbles right there. Nobody can come out
here and say this well's not leaking.
I figured we'd find two, three, four,
five leakers and every time I have stuck
a bucket in the ground
or the problem well
[Music]
the Permium Basin is the world's biggest
shale oil production basin and it's it's
really helped to revolutionize the US
oil industry and also the US economy
over the last 10 years or so. If the
Perian was an OPEC member, it would be
as big as Iraq and Q8 combined.
>> What happens over time is the basin
becomes like a layer cake where you have
different types of rocks and then in
those basins oil and gas develop. But
the Perian has a water problem.
For every barrel of oil that is produced
in the Perian basin, you also get about
3 to five barrels of waste water. We
call it water, but it's it's pretty
toxic stuff. It's as much as five times
saltier than the ocean. It contains oil
and gas residue, and it contains all
other matter of heavy metals and
radioactive materials.
>> The vast majority of that water gets
reinjected down into the subsurface. And
that reingjection changes the pressures
and reactivates existing faults. The
earthquakes began here just off of
campus. There were a series of mid-
magnitude 3 earthquakes and they caused
quite a bit of alarm.
>> The fact that earthquakes even happen in
Texas at all, I've grew up in Texas all
my life and this is an unusual concept.
Why would you have earthquakes around
here? It doesn't make much sense.
From 2021 to 2023, you had a couple
hundred earthquakes per year. And we
started writing stories about how Texas
could be on track to eclipse California
for the most earthquakes.
>> There is no doubt now that the
earthquakes in the Perian Basin are
largely driven by oil and gas
operations. But most earthquakes out in
the Perian Basin are not generated
directly from hydroofracking. It's more
about the produced water.
>> So both the operator response group and
the regulator decided that they had to
do something. How about we shift
wastewater disposal from deep to
shallow. So as you're disposing more in
shallow wells, they're starting to build
up the pressure in the shallow part of
the earth's crust. And eventually that
leads to water leaking and becoming
geysers.
Damn it. I hate it when I get wet.
[Music]
I call them zombie wells because they
are supposed to be dead and like zombies
they rise from the grave and they're
unkillable because you have to kill the
source which is the produced water.
So, this is the pipe that's supposed to
protect our freshwater from the oil and
gas. And I've got oil and gas leaking
from below outside of the surface
casing.
>> My name is Sarah Stagner and I'm the
lawyer that came out here and started
seeing problems with these wells. We are
digging up wells because they're leaking
this black stinky stuff, which is crude
oil that's supposed to be 2400 ft below
the ground. And because they've been
over injecting water from the new
horizontal wells, it's pushing this
stuff up and through these old well
boards. If the Perium Basin is one like
huge giant cake and you've stabbed it
enough that it's kind of fragile and
then you start taking icing out and that
oil comes with water and it's not clean
water. It's toxic. It's nasty. Well, you
put it into a shallower layer. that
shallower layer isn't used to having all
of that water in it. And now you've got
all these straws that were poked and
pressure will find the path of least
resistance. And so now what we've got is
a disaster of a cake that's collapsing
over here. It's rising up over here. The
icing is leaking between layers. It's
coming up its surface. That's what's
happening.
[Music]
I think I didn't realize how bad the
situation was and Chevron already did
and the Railroad Commission already did.
Do they recognize that there's a
problem? Yes. Are they still trying to
get rid of any responsibility? Yes.
[Music]
The first thing you need to know about
the Railroad Commission of Texas is that
it's nothing to do with trains. It's the
oil and gas regulator in Texas. Over the
years, there've been plenty of other
reporting over these toxic geysers
erupting seemingly randomly around the
oil fields. We really wanted to kind of
get to the bottom of this to say what is
the relationship between the regulator
and the industry. What did they know?
When did they know it? So, we submitted
a bunch of freedom information requests.
We received back huge volume of
information. The more we studied it, the
more we started to build up a timeline
of what went on and the methods they
used to balance the problem of
earthquakes versus the problem of water
disposal.
The railroad commission in mid 2023
agreed to consider easing restrictions
around shallow disposal. So here we have
a document from October 2023
which uh which states quite clearly that
shallow disposal has some serious
problems. They actually state that they
are seeing leaks as a result of shallow
water disposal. Say breakouts reported
by field operations could be linked to
shallow disposal. This is a presentation
from the railroad commission to the
Texas pipeline association. This is not
a presentation to the public, but again
it shows that the railroad commission
was fully aware of some of the hazards
that were coming from increased
reservoir pressure. Indeed, I have a
slide here titled hazards from increased
reservoir pressure and includes drilling
hazards, well damage, tubular corrosion,
harm to legacy production, confinement
failure, surface flows, and harm to
underground sources of drinking water,
which raises a lot of questions. Why
proceed when you know that there are
clear and present dangers?
[Music]
If we want to continue to produce oil
and gas in Texas, in the United States,
we have to find a solution to the water
problem.
>> What began a couple years ago was an
effort to start to look at other ways to
reuse this water.
>> The treated water, it's clear. You don't
see any particulate in it. Um, this is
essentially distilled quality water. We
look at this dalinated produced water as
another way to supplement that fresh
water and provide another source. That
fresh water can then be used for other
industrial applications like cooling
towers, things like building in
construction materials for agriculture.
There's a lot of optimism for what can
happen. What you're really hoping is
that you can maybe claw out about half
of the produced water that is coming out
of these wells right now. That would
give a lot of breathing room to the oil
and gas industry. We're now at the point
where we wonder how fast this can sort
of be made economical for the oil
companies to clean it in scale. How fast
can they get the technology working
properly where it's reliable? Um, and so
that's that's a big if.
>> 2018 2019 we were talking about 8 to 10
million barrels of water a day. 2 years
ago we were talking about 18 million
barrels and now we're talking about 25
to 30 million barrels. And these
horizontal wells, the older they get,
the more water they produce to oil. The
problem is not getting better. It's only
going to get worse.
>> People just think of West Texas a barren
wasteland, and that's that's not what it
is. Oh, we got some wildlife. There's
deer run through here. There's bobcats.
And this should be a huge concern for
the railroad commission, but it's not in
their backyard.
Hey. Hey. Hey.
[Music]